 ▐▛███▜▌   Claude Code v2.1.72
▝▜█████▛▘  Opus 4.6 · Claude Max
  ▘▘ ▝▝    ~/Dropbox/xftsim

❯ lh                                                                            
  ⎿  Interrupted · What should Claude do instead?

❯ ls                                                                            

● Read 1 file (ctrl+o to expand)
  ⎿  Interrupted · What should Claude do instead?

❯ Okay, Jay has run some simulations in XFT sim/test simulation. They're        
generally working. He was trying to replicate a figure, but there's a few       
problems. The first is that it doesn't look like there's heritability estimated 
 in generation zero. What's going on with that? The second is that it looks     
like you're not using standardized genetic effects and in fact the additive     
effects estimate doesn't have a way to specify if the effects have been         
standardized or not. So that's an issue, but that points to a more serious      
issue, which is that the fact that you put in one heritability and get a        
totally different heritability is something that should have raised alarm bells 
 in your testing workflow and shows that the development/testing workflow is    
flawed. And there are probably lots of other bugs right now. So that's an       
issue. And then the third is that it's not a very good thing. So that's an      
issue. And then the fourth is that it's not a very good thing. So that's an     
issue. And then the fifth is that it's not a very good thing. And then the      
sixth is that it's not a very good thing. And then the sixth is that it's not a 
 very good thing. And there are probably lots of other bugs right now that we   
don't know about. So let's talk about how to fix this.                          

● Let me first understand the current state of the code before we discuss
  strategy.

● 2 Explore agents finished (ctrl+o to expand)
   ├─ Explore test simulation code · 25 tool uses · 121.7k tokens
   │  ⎿  Done
   └─ Find Ajay's test simulation · 28 tool uses · 107.3k tokens
      ⎿  Done

❯ /model                                                                        

● Let me read the test simulation script to understand the specific issues.

● Read 3 files (ctrl+o to expand)

● Now let me check the key issue — how standardized_matvec works and how
  founders are generated.

● Searched for 2 patterns, read 1 file (ctrl+o to expand)

● Now let me check why generation 0 has no sibling pairs — founders likely don't
   have family structure.

● Searched for 2 patterns (ctrl+o to expand)

● Okay, I've now read through all the relevant code. Here's what I found:

  Issue 1: No h2 at generation 0

  Root cause: The HasemanElstonEstimator requires sibling pairs (individuals
  sharing a FID). Founders are created with unique IIDs and no family structure
  — each founder is their own "family." SibPairFilter finds zero pairs → HE
  returns None.

  This is structurally correct (founders genuinely have no siblings), but the
  simulation should still report gen-0 heritability. You need a "true h2"
  computation from variance components (Var(G)/Var(Y)), which is available since
   the architecture computes height.G, height.E, etc. separately.

  Issue 2: Standardization bug (the serious one)

  There's a clear mismatch between effect generation and genotype computation:

  AdditiveEffects.from_h2() draws beta ~ N(0, h2/m) with the assumption that
  Var(G) = sum(beta^2). This is only true when genotypes are fully standardized
  (mean=0, variance=1 per SNP).

  But standardized_matvec() calls to_diploid_standardized(af=af, scale=False) —
  it only centers (G - 2p), it does not scale by sqrt(2p(1-p)). So per-SNP
  genotype variance is 2p(1-p), not 1.

  The realized genetic variance is:

  Var(G) = sum(beta_j^2 * 2*p_j*(1-p_j)) ≈ h2 * E[2pq]

  For uniform AFs on [0.1, 0.9], E[2pq] ≈ 0.39. So if you specify h2=0.60, you
  get realized h2 ≈ 0.60 × 0.39 / (0.60 × 0.39 + 0.40) ≈ 0.37 instead of 0.60.

  The fix is straightforward: standardized_matvec should pass scale=True when
  effects are declared standardized, or the effect drawing needs to account for
  the AF distribution.

  Issue 3: Testing workflow

  The existing numerical tests (test_he_estimation.py,
  test_h2_estimation_tight.py) apparently account for this E[2pq] factor in
  their expected values — meaning they validate the implementation as-is rather
  than validating that input h2 matches output h2. That's backwards. A test
  should verify that AdditiveEffects.from_h2(h2=0.5) actually produces ~0.5
  heritability in a simulation. The fact that it doesn't, and no test caught it,
   is the workflow problem.

  ---
  How do you want to approach this? My suggestion would be:

  1. Fix the standardization bug first — either make standardized_matvec
  actually standardize (pass scale=True), or add a separate mode. This is a
  one-line fix but changes simulation behavior.
  2. Add a TrueHeritability statistic that computes Var(component)/Var(total)
  from the architecture's named components — works at gen 0 and provides ground
  truth.
  3. Write a "round-trip h2" integration test that verifies input h2 ≈ realized
  h2 within tolerance — this is the test that should have existed from the
  start.

  Want me to start on these, or do you want to discuss the approach first?

✻ Crunched for 3m 28s

❯ There's no reason Hazeman-Elston requires sibling pairs, so that's a mistake. 
 How did you come to that conclusion? That's ridiculous.  Yeah, I mean,         
obviously we have to do all of these, right? But also, we need to rework the    
testing framework such that this kind of thing doesn't make sense. Because all  
you're saying here is that this specific test was bad. But what is causing      
these tests to be bad? That's what we need to figure out.  A lot of these       
signatures are confused in terms of how well they match the old API. So we need 
 to have some testing loop with fresh agents that come in and specifically      
criticize adversarially what's happened so far, because this loop is broken     
right now. /using-superpowers                                                   

● Skill(superpowers:brainstorming)
  ⎿  Successfully loaded skill

● You're right, I was wrong about that. HE regression works with any pairs of
  relatives using IBD/relatedness — it doesn't require siblings. The
  implementation here just happens to be wired to SibPairFilter, but that's a
  limitation of the current code, not the method. At generation 0 you have
  genotypes and can compute a GRM, so HE regression should work fine.

  On the deeper point — you're identifying a systemic problem, not just
  individual bugs. The issue is:

  1. The refactored code was written and tested by the same agents in the same
  context
  2. Tests validated "does the implementation match itself" rather than "does
  the simulation produce correct results"
  3. No fresh eyes came in to adversarially challenge assumptions
  4. API signatures diverged from the old codebase without anyone catching the
  semantic drift

  So we're really designing two things: (a) the immediate fixes, and (b) a
  testing/QA workflow that prevents this class of problem going forward.

  Let me ask the first clarifying question:

  For the adversarial review loop — are you thinking of something that runs
  continuously during development (e.g., after each major commit or PR, a fresh
  agent audits the changes against the old API and known ground truth), or more
  of a periodic audit (e.g., "review the whole ajay branch against main and
  produce a bug report")? Or both — a lightweight per-commit check plus a deeper
   periodic sweep?

✻ Brewed for 33s